Causes

It isn't clear why some people get asthma and others don't, but it's probably due to a combination of environmental and genetic (inherited) factors.
Asthma triggers

Exposure to various irritants and substances that trigger allergies (allergens) can trigger signs and symptoms of asthma. Asthma triggers are different from person to person and can include:

    Airborne substances, such as pollen, dust mites, mold spores, pet dander or particles of cockroach waste
    Respiratory infections, such as the common cold
    Physical activity (exercise-induced asthma)
    Cold air
    Air pollutants and irritants, such as smoke
    Certain medications, including beta blockers, aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) and naproxen (Aleve)
    Strong emotions and stress
    Sulfites and preservatives added to some types of foods and beverages, including shrimp, dried fruit, processed potatoes, beer and wine
    Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), a condition in which stomach acids back up into your throat








Risk factors

A number of factors are thought to increase your chances of developing asthma. These include:

    Having a blood relative (such as a parent or sibling) with asthma
    Having another allergic condition, such as atopic dermatitis or allergic rhinitis (hay fever)
    Being overweight
    Being a smoker
    Exposure to secondhand smoke
    Exposure to exhaust fumes or other types of pollution
    Exposure to occupational triggers, such as chemicals used in farming, hairdressing and manufacturing







Complications

Asthma complications include:

    Signs and symptoms that interfere with sleep, work or recreational activities
    Sick days from work or school during asthma flare-ups
    Permanent narrowing of the bronchial tubes (airway remodeling) that affects how well you can breathe
    Emergency room visits and hospitalizations for severe asthma attacks
    Side effects from long-term use of some medications used to stabilize severe asthma

Proper treatment makes a big difference in preventing both short-term and long-term complications caused by asthma.







Prevention

While there's no way to prevent asthma, by working together, you and your doctor can design a step-by-step plan for living with your condition and preventing asthma attacks.

    Follow your asthma action plan. With your doctor and health care team, write a detailed plan for taking medications and managing an asthma attack. Then be sure to follow your plan.

    Asthma is an ongoing condition that needs regular monitoring and treatment. Taking control of your treatment can make you feel more in control of your life in general.
    Get vaccinated for influenza and pneumonia. Staying current with vaccinations can prevent flu and pneumonia from triggering asthma flare-ups.
    Identify and avoid asthma triggers. A number of outdoor allergens and irritants — ranging from pollen and mold to cold air and air pollution — can trigger asthma attacks. Find out what causes or worsens your asthma, and take steps to avoid those triggers.
    Monitor your breathing. You may learn to recognize warning signs of an impending attack, such as slight coughing, wheezing or shortness of breath. But because your lung function may decrease before you notice any signs or symptoms, regularly measure and record your peak airflow with a home peak flow meter.

    Identify and treat attacks early. If you act quickly, you're less likely to have a severe attack. You also won't need as much medication to control your symptoms.

    When your peak flow measurements decrease and alert you to an oncoming attack, take your medication as instructed and immediately stop any activity that may have triggered the attack. If your symptoms don't improve, get medical help as directed in your action plan.
    Take your medication as prescribed. Just because your asthma seems to be improving, don't change anything without first talking to your doctor. It's a good idea to bring your medications with you to each doctor visit, so your doctor can double-check that you're using your medications correctly and taking the right dose.
    Pay attention to increasing quick-relief inhaler use. If you find yourself relying on your quick-relief inhaler, such as albuterol, your asthma isn't under control. See your doctor about adjusting your treatment.
