Causes

    Illustration showing normal kidney compared with diseased kidney
    Normal kidney vs. diseased kidney

    Polycystic kidney compared with normal kidney
    Polycystic kidney

Chronic kidney disease occurs when a disease or condition impairs kidney function, causing kidney damage to worsen over several months or years.

Diseases and conditions that cause chronic kidney disease include:

    Type 1 or type 2 diabetes
    High blood pressure
    Glomerulonephritis (gloe-mer-u-low-nuh-FRY-tis), an inflammation of the kidney's filtering units (glomeruli)
    Interstitial nephritis (in-tur-STISH-ul nuh-FRY-tis), an inflammation of the kidney's tubules and surrounding structures
    Polycystic kidney disease
    Prolonged obstruction of the urinary tract, from conditions such as enlarged prostate, kidney stones and some cancers
    Vesicoureteral (ves-ih-koe-yoo-REE-tur-ul) reflux, a condition that causes urine to back up into your kidneys
    Recurrent kidney infection, also called pyelonephritis (pie-uh-low-nuh-FRY-tis)









Risk factors

Factors that may increase your risk of chronic kidney disease include:

    Diabetes
    High blood pressure
    Heart and blood vessel (cardiovascular) disease
    Smoking
    Obesity
    Being African-American, Native American or Asian-American
    Family history of kidney disease
    Abnormal kidney structure
    Older age









Complications

Chronic kidney disease can affect almost every part of your body. Potential complications may include:

    Fluid retention, which could lead to swelling in your arms and legs, high blood pressure, or fluid in your lungs (pulmonary edema)
    A sudden rise in potassium levels in your blood (hyperkalemia), which could impair your heart's ability to function and may be life-threatening
    Heart and blood vessel (cardiovascular) disease
    Weak bones and an increased risk of bone fractures
    Anemia
    Decreased sex drive, erectile dysfunction or reduced fertility
    Damage to your central nervous system, which can cause difficulty concentrating, personality changes or seizures
    Decreased immune response, which makes you more vulnerable to infection
    Pericarditis, an inflammation of the saclike membrane that envelops your heart (pericardium)
    Pregnancy complications that carry risks for the mother and the developing fetus
    Irreversible damage to your kidneys (end-stage kidney disease), eventually requiring either dialysis or a kidney transplant for survival












Prevention

To reduce your risk of developing kidney disease:

    Follow instructions on over-the-counter medications. When using nonprescription pain relievers, such as aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) and acetaminophen (Tylenol, others), follow the instructions on the package. Taking too many pain relievers could lead to kidney damage and generally should be avoided if you have kidney disease. Ask your doctor whether these drugs are safe for you.
    Maintain a healthy weight. If you're at a healthy weight, work to maintain it by being physically active most days of the week. If you need to lose weight, talk with your doctor about strategies for healthy weight loss. Often this involves increasing daily physical activity and reducing calories.
    Don't smoke. Cigarette smoking can damage your kidneys and make existing kidney damage worse. If you're a smoker, talk to your doctor about strategies for quitting smoking. Support groups, counseling and medications can all help you to stop.
    Manage your medical conditions with your doctor's help. If you have diseases or conditions that increase your risk of kidney disease, work with your doctor to control them. Ask your doctor about tests to look for signs of kidney damage.
