Causes

The plague bacteria, Yersinia pestis, is transmitted to humans through the bites of fleas that have previously fed on infected animals, such as:

    Rats
    Mice
    Squirrels
    Rabbits
    Prairie dogs
    Chipmunks
    Voles

The bacteria can also enter your body if a break in your skin comes into contact with an infected animal's blood. Domestic cats and dogs can become infected with plague from flea bites or from eating infected rodents.

Pneumonic plague, which affects the lungs, is spread by inhaling infectious droplets coughed into the air by a sick animal or person.









Risk factors

The risk of developing plague is very low. Worldwide, only a few thousand people develop plague each year. However, your plague risk can be increased depending on the area where you live and travel, your job, and your hobbies.
Location

Plague outbreaks are most common in rural and semirural areas that are overcrowded, have poor sanitation and have a high rodent population. The greatest number of human plague infections occur in Africa, especially the African island of Madagascar. Plague has also been transmitted to humans in parts of Asia and South America.

In the United States, plague is rare, but it has been known to occur in several western and southwestern states — primarily New Mexico, Arizona, California and Colorado.
Job

Veterinarians and their assistants have a higher risk of coming into contact with domestic cats and dogs that may have become infected with plague. People who work outdoors in areas where plague-infected animals are common are also at higher risk of getting plague.
Hobbies

Camping, hunting or hiking in areas where plague-infected animals reside can increase your risk of being bitten by an infected flea.













Complications

Complications of plague may include:

    Death. Most people who receive prompt antibiotic treatment survive bubonic plague. Untreated plague has a high fatality rate.
    Gangrene. Blood clots in the tiny blood vessels of your fingers and toes can disrupt blood flow and cause that tissue to die. The portions of your fingers and toes that have died may need to be removed (amputated).
    Meningitis. Rarely, plague may cause inflammation of the membranes surrounding your brain and spinal cord (meningitis).














Prevention

No effective vaccine is available, but scientists are working to develop one. Antibiotics can help prevent infection if you're at risk of or have been exposed to plague. Take the following precautions if you live or spend time in areas where plague outbreaks occur:

    Rodent-proof your home. Remove potential nesting areas, such as piles of brush, rock, firewood and junk. Don't leave pet food in areas that rodents can easily access. If you become aware of a rodent infestation, take steps to control it.
    Keep your pets free of fleas. Ask your veterinarian which flea-control products will work best.
    Wear gloves. When handling potentially infected animals, wear gloves to prevent contact between your skin and harmful bacteria.
    Use insect repellent. Closely supervise your children and pets when spending time outside in areas with large rodent populations. Use insect repellent.
