Causes

Rabies infection is caused by the rabies virus. The virus is spread through the saliva of infected animals. Infected animals can spread the virus by biting another animal or a person. In rare cases, rabies can be spread when infected saliva gets into an open wound or the mucous membranes, such as the mouth or eyes. This could occur if an infected animal were to lick an open cut on your skin.
Animals that can transmit the rabies virus

Any mammal (an animal that suckles its young) can transmit the rabies virus. The animals most likely to transmit the rabies virus to people include:
Pets and farm animals

    Cats
    Cows
    Dogs
    Ferrets
    Goats
    Horses

Wild animals

    Bats
    Beavers
    Coyotes
    Foxes
    Monkeys
    Raccoons
    Skunks
    Woodchucks

In rare cases, the virus has been transmitted to tissue and organ transplant recipients from an infected organ.












Risk factors

Factors that can increase your risk of rabies include:

    Traveling or living in developing countries where rabies is more common, including countries in Africa and Southeast Asia
    Activities that are likely to put you in contact with wild animals that may have rabies, such as exploring caves where bats live or camping without taking precautions to keep wild animals away from your campsite
    Working in a laboratory with the rabies virus
    Wounds to the head or neck, which may help the rabies virus travel to your brain more quickly











Prevention

To reduce your risk of coming in contact with rabid animals:

    Vaccinate your pets. Cats, dogs and ferrets can be vaccinated against rabies. Ask your veterinarian how often your pets should be vaccinated.
    Keep your pets confined. Keep your pets inside and supervise them when outside. This will help keep your pets from coming in contact with wild animals.
    Protect small pets from predators. Keep rabbits and other small pets, such as guinea pigs, inside or in protected cages so that they are safe from wild animals. These small pets can't be vaccinated against rabies.
    Report stray animals to local authorities. Call your local animal control officials or other local law enforcement to report stray dogs and cats.
    Don't approach wild animals. Wild animals with rabies may seem unafraid of people. It's not normal for a wild animal to be friendly with people, so stay away from any animal that seems unafraid.
    Keep bats out of your home. Seal any cracks and gaps where bats can enter your home. If you know you have bats in your home, work with a local expert to find ways to keep bats out.

    Consider the rabies vaccine if you're traveling. If you're traveling to a country where rabies is common and you'll be there for an extended period of time, ask your doctor whether you should receive the rabies vaccine.

    This includes traveling to remote areas where medical care is difficult to find.
