Causes

Spores of the bacteria that cause tetanus, Clostridium tetani, are found in soil, dust and animal feces. When they enter a deep flesh wound, spores grow into bacteria that can produce a powerful toxin, tetanospasmin, which impairs the nerves that control your muscles (motor neurons). The toxin can cause muscle stiffness and spasms — the major signs of tetanus.

Nearly all cases of tetanus occur in people who have never been vaccinated or adults who haven't kept up with their 10-year booster shots. You can't catch tetanus from a person who has it.










Risk factors

The following increase your likelihood of getting tetanus:

    Failure to get vaccinated or to keep up to date with booster shots against tetanus
    An injury that lets tetanus spores into the wound
    A foreign body, such as a nail or splinter

Tetanus cases have developed from the following:

    Puncture wounds — including from splinters, body piercings, tattoos, injection drugs
    Gunshot wounds
    Compound fractures
    Burns
    Surgical wounds
    Injection drug use
    Animal or insect bites
    Infected foot ulcers
    Dental infections
    Infected umbilical stumps in newborns born of inadequately immunized mothers














Complications

Once tetanus toxin has bonded to your nerve endings it is impossible to remove. Complete recovery from a tetanus infection requires new nerve endings to grow, which can take up to several months.

Complications of tetanus infection may include:

    Broken bones. The severity of spasms may cause the spine and other bones to break.
    Blockage of a lung artery (pulmonary embolism). A blood clot that has traveled from elsewhere in your body can block the main artery of the lung or one of its branches.
    Death. Severe tetanus-induced (tetanic) muscle spasms can interfere with or stop your breathing. Respiratory failure is the most common cause of death. Lack of oxygen may also induce cardiac arrest and death. Pneumonia is another cause of death.













Prevention

You can easily prevent tetanus by being immunized.
The primary vaccine series

The tetanus vaccine usually is given to children as part of the diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and acellular pertussis (DTaP) vaccine. This vaccination provides protection against three diseases: a throat and respiratory infection (diphtheria), whooping cough (pertussis) and tetanus.

The DTaP vaccine is a series of five shots, typically given in the arm or thigh to children at ages:

    2 months
    4 months
    6 months
    15 to 18 months
    4 to 6 years

The booster

A booster of the tetanus vaccine is typically given in combination with a booster of diphtheria vaccine (Td). In 2005, a tetanus, diphtheria and pertussis (Tdap) vaccine was approved for use in teens and adults under age 65 to ensure continuing protection against pertussis, too.

It's recommended that adolescents get a dose of Tdap, preferably between the ages of 11 and 12, and a Td booster every 10 years thereafter. If you've never received a dose of Tdap, substitute it for your next Td booster dose and then continue with Td boosters.

If you're traveling internationally, particularly to a developing country where tetanus might be common, make sure your immunity is current.

To stay up to date with all of your vaccinations, ask your doctor to review your vaccination status regularly.

If you weren't vaccinated against tetanus as a child, see your doctor about getting the Tdap vaccine.